&&&&&&&1.Real-time Detecting Method of Marine Small Object
with Underwater Robot Vision
Fengqiang Xu, Xueyan Ding, Jinjia Peng, Guoliang Yuan, Yafei Wang, Jun Zhang, Xianping Fu
Information Science and Technology College
Dalian Maritime University
Dalian 116026, China
{xfq, dingxueyan meow, pengjinjia, yuan, wangyafei, william, fxp}@dlmu.edu.cn
Abstract—Detection and counting small objects using underwater
robot draw an appealing attention because of its urgent
demands in marine aquaculture. Because this challenge problem
must be solved before the underwater robot can be used to catch
seafood in practice instead of diver. This paper proposed a novel
method using Faster R-CNN and kernelized correlation filter
(KCF) tracking algorithm to detect seafood objects, such as sea
cucumber, sea urchin, and scallop and so on in real time. Firstly,
we trained an accurate and stable Faster R-CNN detector with
VGG model using underwater image database, which is built by
ourselves. Next, we recognized and tracked the seafood objects in
order to fetch them using underwater robot vision in naturalistic
ocean environment. The experimental results show the proposed
method can recognized and catch seafood in real time using our
integrated underwater robot.
Keywords—Marine small target; Object detection; Object tracking;
Convolutional neural network; Underwater robot
I. INTRODUCTION
Recently, using underwater robot to detect and to catch
marine small object is a hot research topic,because it is
an efficient solution to replace the diver to capture seafood
in marine aquaculture[1]. To reach this goal, there are two
problems need to be solved: (1) detection of marine small
object and (2) development of underwater robot.
Poor visibility of underwater image captured by cameras
results in a difficult task for perception of ocean environments
and recognizing underwater objects[2]. Due to this reason,
traditional detection methods based on image feature can‘t
perform well. Motivated by the fact that Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) have produced impressive performance improvements
in several areas, such as face recognition, pedestrian
detection, autonomous driving and so on. This paper adopt
Convolutional Neural Network to detect marine small object.
In the past several years, many advanced object detection
method based on CNNs have been proposed, including RCNN[
3], Fast R-CNN[4], Faster R-CNN[5], etc. The Faster RCNN
is state-of-the-art in object detection. And several method
have been proposed in the foundation of it. In this paper, we
adopt Faster R-CNN as the detector to detect seafood.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China Grant 61370142 and Grant 61272368, by the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities Grant 3132016352, by the Fundamental
Research of Ministry of Transport of P. R. China Grant 2015329225300.
Different underwater robots have been created for ocean‘s
exploration and exploitation. However, almost of them are used
to observe the marine object or capture images and videos. It is
hard to find the application of automatic detection in underwater
robot. Thus, using underwater robot to automatically catch
marine small object still face a huge challenge. To conquer this
problem, it is supposed to develop a underwater robot which
have ability to detect marine small object.
To deal with above problems, in this paper, we proposed
a novel method using Faster R-CNN and KCF tracking algorithm
to detect marine objects. Firstly, we train a detector
on our underwater dataset to produce the bounding boxes and
categories of the object. Then we train a tracker based on
the KCF to track and count the object. Finally, this method is
adopted to detect marine objects using underwater robot vision
in real time.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Object detection
According to whether need region proposal, State-of-theart
object detection methods based on CNN can be divided
into two groups: (1) region proposal based methods and (2)
proposal-free methods[6]. Proposal based methods, including
R-CNN, Fast R-CNN, Faster R-CNN, achieve excellent object
detection accuracy. R-CNN uses selective search to first generate
potential object regions in an image and then perform
classification on the proposed region. However, R-CNN requires
high computational costs since each region is processed
by the CNN network separately. Fast R-CNN builds deep
convolutional networks to efficiently classify object proposals.
Faster R-CNN introduces a Region Proposal Network(RPN)[5]
that shares full-image convolutional features with the object
bounds and scores at each position.
Proposal-free methods, such as YOLO and SSD, have
recently been proposed for real-time detection. These methods
frame object detection as a regression problem which using
a single neural network to detect object and category from
full images in one evaluation. So, it can be optimized endto-
end directly on detection performance. YOLO computes a
global feature map and uses a fully-connected layer to predict
objects classes and locations in a fixed set of regions[7]. SSD
improves YOLO by adding layers of feature maps for each
scale and using a convolutional filter for prediction[8].
978-1-5386-1654-3/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Harbin Engineering Univ Library. Downloaded on October 20,2023 at 11:34:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
1.The control mainboard
2. The buoyancy module
3. The underwater propeller
4. The LED lights
5. The shell
6. The buoyancy cables
7. The underwater camera
8. The manipulator
8
7
3
4
1
2
6
5
2
2
(c)
(a) (b)
(d) (e)
Fig. 1. The structure and view of our underwater robot.(a) is the top view of the robot; (d) is the structure of the underwater robot; (b) is the explanation of
(d); (c) and (e) are captured under the water.
B. Faster R-CNN
In object detection, region-based CNN detection methods
are now the main paradigm. Compared to traditional
methodology, deep ConvNets have significantly improved the
performance on image classification and object detection[3].
The Faster R-CNN is state-of-the-art object detection network
depends on region proposal algorithms to hypothesize object
location. It creatively introduces a Region Proposal Network
that shares full-image convolutional features with the detection
network to reduce computational burden of proposal generation.
The structure of The Faster R-CNN is consisted of two
modules: (1)the Region Proposal Network and (2)the Fast RCNN
object detection network. the RPN took an image(of
any size) as input and outputted a set of rectangular object
proposals, each with an objectness score[5]. And the Fast
R-CNN object detection network[1] was adopt to refine the
proposals.
III. THE PROPOSED APPROACH
A. The structure of underwater robot
Recently, the research and development of remotely operated
vehicle (ROV)[9] draws an attractive attention in marine
aquaculture. It has urgent demands to adopt the underwater
robot to detect and grab the marine organism. However, the
manufacturing of the underwater robot is confronted with huge
obstacle, because it needs to address additional issues from the
ocean, such as undercurrent, variation of buoyancy and so on.
To solve these problems, our underwater robot is constitutive
of seven essential parts contained in the shell,which is
showed in Fig.1. The control mainboard is the hub of signal
communication which responsibilities are gathering signal
information from the operating handle to command the device
to work and responding to requirement, such as diving, turning
direction, capturing video and so on. The underwater propellers
are responsible for improving thrust to the robot, and the
buoyancy module could conquer the gravity to keep balance.
To capture high-quality video, the underwater camera is
demanded to support 4K video recording. Both sides of the
fuselage are equipped with LED lights to satisfy the shooting
of underwater dark and turbid environment[9]. The buoyancy
cables are ad hoc bridge for robot to connect with power supply
and displayer. Once done with detection, we can operate the
manipulator to accurately grab the object.
B. Marine object detection based on Faster R-CNN
Because of feature attenuation in underwater image, it is
hard to detect marine objects. For detection algorithm based on
region proposal, Faster R-CNN is classical and fundamental,
which could extract abundant features from image and train as
a powerful detector. Thus, we take advantage of Faster R-CNN
as base framework to train our detector.
In this paper, we adopt ImageNet dataset to pre-train the
network and produce the parameters which are adopted to
initialize our model. After then we make use of our own dataset
collected by ourselves with underwater robot for training and
testing. We generate the proposal regions and scores by RPN.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Harbin Engineering Univ Library. Downloaded on October 20,2023 at 11:34:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
(d) (e) (f)
(a) (b) (c)
sea cucumber:5; sea urchin:17; scallop:12 sea cucumber:4; sea urchin:8; scallop:11 sea cucumber:4; sea urchin:18; scallop:16
sea cucumber:5; sea urchin:17; scallop:15 sea cucumber:5; sea urchin:8; scallop:12 sea cucumber:4; sea urchin:19; scallop:17
Fig. 2. The experimental results of tracking and counting marine objects. The top images (a),(b) and (c) are the begin frames, and the bottom images (d),(e)
and (f) are the next frames respectively relative to the above images. The boxes of sea cucumber, sea urchin and scallop are separately labeled with blue, red
and yellow color. From (a) to (d), the total of ( sea cucumber, sea urchin, scallop) are varied from (5,17,12) to (5,17,15); From (b) to (e), the total of ( sea
cucumber, sea urchin, scallop) are varied from (4,8,11) to (5,8,12); From (c) to (f), the total of ( sea cucumber, sea urchin, scallop) are varied from (4,18,16)
to (4,19,17).
In the RPN, the last shared convolutional layers of a pretrained
network are followed by a 3 × 3 convolutional layer.
Two sibling 1 × 1 convolutional layers are then added for
classification and regression. After training our detector, we
can generate and select the bounding boxes of the object target
accurately for each frame.
C. Marine object tracking and counting based on KCF
Tracking is an important assignment for statistic of seafood
target[10].And the kernelized correlation filters tracker achives
very impressive results on Visual Tracker Benchmark[11].In
this paper, we employ the KCF tracking algorithm to track
marine objects. Firstly, we initialize KCF tracker with the
bounding boxes of object getting by Faster R-CNN detection.
Then we track the new object of the next frames by aforementioned
tracker. Finally, the total of the seafood object should
be produced.It is significant to figure out the density of the
seafood in marine aquaculture.
By calculating the distance d between the center location
of the bounding box of the seafood objects from detection and
tracking, we further calculate the result r (r = d/w, where w
is the width of the input image). If r < λ (λ = 0.05, where λ
is a threshold), they are regarded as the same one, otherwise
the latter should be regarded as a new object.
However, it is unreasonable to count directly, for instance
the object in one frame may be detected miss or false, but
in other frames is correct[12]. To address the miss or false
detection[13], only when the new object continuously appears
in the next 5 frames should it be counted.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. The datasets of underwater image
For task of object detection based on CNNs, datasets are
very important and necessary. There are lots of famous datasets,
such as ImageNet[14], COCO[15], PASCAL VOC[16] and
so on. These datasets usually include the category of common
objects, for instance, dog, cat, vehicle and people. However, the
seafood objects are seldom covered in it. It is disadvantageous
to detection of marine objects. Thus, It is of great importance
to build a dataset of underwater image. So we build a dataset
of underwater images by ourselves.
Nowadays, our underwater image dataset is mainly including
28,000 pictures and three categories: sea cucumber, sea
urchin, and scallop. The images are captured by our integrated
underwater robot in naturalistic ocean environment. In order
to improving the multiplicity of the dataset, we augment
the underwater by doing mirror transformation and image
enhancement for some pictures.
B. Training and testing our model
In order to adapt marine environment of ocean, we train
and test our model on our underwater image dataset, which
are captured by our integrated underwater robot. We compiled
the results in Table 1 using a Nvidia GeForce GTX 1080 Ti
GPU and cuDNN v5.1 and an Intel Core i7-6700K@4.00GHz.
Whats more, We have separately trained two network models
Faster R-CNN ZF and VGG-16. In fact, VGG-16 model is
more complicated than ZF. From the results of experiment,
the mAP of VGG-16 model is higher than ZF.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Harbin Engineering Univ Library. Downloaded on October 20,2023 at 11:34:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
TABLE I. DETECTION RESULTS ON OUR DATASET
Network mAP
Faster R-CNN ZF 71.3
Faster R-CNN VGG-16 79.6
C. Tracking and counting the object
After training our detector, it is supposed to initialize the
KCF tracker by parameters produced from detection stage.
Then we track the object from frames. With the foundation of
aforementioned work, we can distinguish whether the detected
object and the tracked object are the same one or not.In the
following work, it is possible to count the seafood object. And
the examples of the experimental results are displayed in Fig.2.
As is shown in Fig.2, image (b) is one of 5 frames adjacent to
image (a). From (a) to (d), the number of scallop is increasing
up to fifteen. In (d), all of the seafood except the three new
scallops are same as (a). Only the number of scallop is varied
from 12 to 15, and the number of sea cucumber and sea urchin
remain unchanged.
The experimental results show that our method has a good
performance on detection and counting of marine small target.
It is of great significance to figure out the density of seafood.
D. Applying the method to the underwater robot
After experiment, we have applied the method proposed
in this paper to our underwater robot. As is shown in Fig.3,
the underwater robot is responsible for capturing video from
ocean. Meanwhile, the video is transferred from the robot to
computer by video capture card. Then our algorithm detect
frames in video to produce categories and locations of the
object in real time.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper proposed a novel method using Faster R-CNN
and KCF tracking algorithm to detect marine objects. Firstly,
we train a detector on our underwater dataset to produce the
bounding boxes and the categories of the object. Then we train
a tracker based on the KCF to track and count the object.
Finally, the whole method is adopted to detect marine objects
using underwater robot vision in real time.
In the future work, we plan to test other popular object
detection model, for instance YOLO and SSD. In addition, we
will continue to expand our underwater dataset.
