&&&&&&&11.Binocular Matching Method for Detecting and
Locating Marine Resources Using Binocular Cameras
and Deep Learning
Xiang Li1*, Yejun Kou1 and Yanchun Liang1
1Zhuhai College of Science and Technology, Zhuhai, Guangdong province, China
*lixiang@zcst.edu.cn
Abstract. It is well known that Artificial Intelligence and
underwater robots play a significant role in energy exploration.
This paper proposes a novel method using binocular cameras to
detect, locate, and track marine resources. The method combines
the YOLOv5 object detection method with the BM algorithm
binocular ranging method. The method then uses a neural network
to identify and detect the position of the target in the image,
matches the detection framework with the depth chart, and
employs a weighted average model to calculate the relative
distance between the target and the object detected by the camera.
Finally, underwater robots can use the relative distance to locate
and track marine resources.
Keywords- Binocular camera, YOLOv5, Deep learning,
Underwater vision
I. INTRODUCTION
Machine vision technology has entered a period of rapid
development and it is known as the “eye” of intelligent
manufacturing. Consequently, machine vision is being
extensively utilized in the field of intelligent manufacturing,
and there is closer integration with intelligent manufacturing.
As the oceans of the world continue to be developed rapidly,
underwater robot technology [1] has received unprecedented
attention and research as the most important means for human
exploration of the oceans. The research of underwater
technology has become one of the key focus points of high-tech
research, and intelligent underwater robots play a vital role on
efficient underwater work platforms in the development and
utilization of the oceans.
A. Research background
Using the parallax principle, a binocular camera was used to
match the horizontal distance of pixels in the center of the block
[2], and the relative distance was calculated. The further the
distance from the object, the smaller the parallax; on the
contrary, the closer the distance from the object, the greater the
parallax. The size of the parallax corresponds to the distance
between the object and the eye. The distance perception of the
target object by the binocular system can ensure accurate
measurements. In case obstacles are encountered, the binocular
camera can send an alert or stop as necessary based on the
changing distance information received. Therefore, binocular
ranging technology is widely used in underwater environments.
This study proposes a new scheme to attach a binocular
camera on an underwater robot (BlueROV2). A target detection
method based on YOLOv5 neural networks was combined with
a binocular ranging method to calculate parallax with binocular
matching to detect, locate and track marine life.
The dynamic and static detection performance was
enhanced by adjusting the detection block size. The average
error of dynamic monitoring was only 10mm in clean water and
13mm in muddy water. Also, the effectiveness of the
compensation function was verified by comparison.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. YOLOv5 Undersea Target Detection Method
1)Model introduction. The YOLO model, which was
described in a paper published by Joseph Redmon in
CVPR2016 [3], is a real-time target detection method that uses
a single neural network to predict bounding boxes and
probabilities directly from a complete image. The YOLOv5 is
an improved model released by Ultraytics in May 2020, and this
model fully benefited from the established Pytorch ecosystem
because it was implemented in the Pytorch framework. The
model weight file is only 27MB, which can be very easily
embedded in a modern device.
YOLOV5 network and general YOLO series algorithms
belong to the category of one-step detection algorithm. In terms
of data preprocessing, YOLOV5 follows the mosaic image
online enhancement method proposed by YOLOV4, aiming to
increase the number of small targets in a single batch, improve
the network's ability to identify small targets, and also increase
the data information in a single batch; In the backbone structure,
FPN (feature pyramid) structure is used to extract features from
the bottom up; In the neck structure, a top-down PAN (path
fusion) structure is used to shorten the path of the low level
feature flow to the prediction level; In the head structure and
prediction structure, the features are integrated, and the lowlevel
features of different receptive fields are fused through
three paths: prediction 1, prediction 2, and prediction 3. Finally,
the boundary box information and category information of the
defect target are output. The CSP layer is used to replace the
residual connection layer.
2) Method for Data Collection. The camera was placed in a
real underwater environment, and the primary data set was
collected through multi-angle photography and the underwater
video frame sampling method.
Underwater images are generally blurry. To solve this
problem, we propose a new and effective strategy to enhance
2023 4th International Conference on Computer Vision, Image and Deep Learning (CVIDL)
979-8-3503-2644-4/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE 381
2023 4th International Conference on Computer Vision, Image and Deep Learning (CVIDL) | 979-8-3503-2644-4/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/CVIDL58838.2023.10167128
Authorized licensed use limited to: Harbin Engineering Univ Library. Downloaded on October 20,2023 at 12:38:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
the image data as shown in Fig.1. Compared with the procedure
of adding extra network structures, the data enhancement
method is simple and effective. The experimental results also
showed that geometric transformation and optical
transformation effectively improved the model’s ability to
detect objects through the use of enhanced data.
The camera was placed in a real underwater environment,
and the primary data set was collected through multi-angle
photography and the underwater video frame sampling method.
Underwater images are generally blurry. To solve this
problem, we propose a new and effective strategy to enhance
the image data as shown in Fig.1. Compared with the procedure
of adding extra network structures, the data enhancement
method is simple and effective. The experimental results also
showed that geometric transformation and optical
transformation effectively improved the model’s ability to
detect objects through the use of enhanced data.
Figure 1. Enhanced data diagram
3) Results of underwater detection. In this experiment as
shown in Fig.2, Authors collected a small number of data sets
in order to verify the feasibility of the proposed method which
combines target detection with binocular ranging. Incremental
training was conducted on YOLOv5s.pt using the data
enhancement method which was described in the previous
paragraph.
Figure 2. Actual detection in an underwater environment
B. Binocular Camera Underwater Target Detection Method
1) The Fundamentals of Camera Calibration. The currently
used ranging methods that are representative of the field mainly
have the following characteristics: Uses a monocular camera
along with a laser receiver [4]. Although this method is simple
and can accurately collect data, the laser is still affected by the
strong absorption and scattering effects of the water. Therefore,
this method cannot be used in underwater environments.
Uses sonar to obtain real-time positioning underwater [5].
This method is widely used in submarines and underwater
detection devices. The commonly used sonar is the side-scan
sonar, and images can be added by drag-and-drop. The images
will be fuzzy in shallow water or in close-range situations
because of its long wavelength. 3D sonar, such as Coda
Octopus's Real-time 3D Echoscope, is expensive and requires a
strong method for processing the return signal.
Uses model-based pattern matching recognition techniques.
For this technique, a large amount of data needs to be measured
and collected on the features of different kinds of sea life, then
the relevant data is used to complete the pre-modeling
procedure. Although the matching performance is good,
significant calculation power is still required.
Uses a binocular stereo-matching method based on image
parallax [6]. This approach obtains parallax images by stereomatching
two monocular cameras. The 3D point cloud is
derived and a 3D image is constructed. Then the distance to the
target object is calculated according to the principle of similar
triangles. This is a low-cost method that only requires a
stereoscopic camera to capture the images. Compared with
other stereo-matching methods, the block matching method has
fast ranging speed and the level of accuracy satisfies the
application requirements.
2) Binocular Ranging Process. Monocular camera
calibration: The main purpose of camera calibration is to derive
a relationship between the camera coordinates in the ideal
coordinate system and the position and direction of the camera
in the World Coordinate System as shown in Fig.3.
Figure 3. Camera coordinates and world coordinates
As shown in Fig.4-5, based on the “Flexible Camera
Calibration by Viewing a Plane from Unknown Orientations”
method, the TOOLBOX from MATLAB was used to calibrate
and calculate the internal parameters of the monocular camera.
(a)
382
Authorized licensed use limited to: Harbin Engineering Univ Library. Downloaded on October 20,2023 at 12:38:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
(b)
Figure 4. The internal parameters of the monocular camera:
(a) Calibrate with binocular camera (world-centered)
(b) Calibrate with monocular camera (camera-centered)
Figure 5. The relative position of the two cameras and the 28 vice boards is
shown in the figure: Binocular camera calibration diagram
After completing the separate calibration of the left and right
monocular cameras, the next step was to use “TOOLBOX_calib”
from Calibration TOOLBOX to continue the binocular camera
calibration process.
Firstly, the left camera was chosen as the fixed reference
position. Then, the rotation matrix R and the translation matrix
T of the coordinate transformation from the right camera to the
left camera were calculated respectively.
Finally, the camera external parameter matrix W can be
determined according to the following equation. The calibration
of the camera has been completed.
𝑾 = 􁈾𝑹 𝑻􁈿 (1)
3) Actual detection performance
Due to the light absorption and scattering that is inherent in
an underwater environment, underwater imaging is
characterized by uneven illumination and unclear features. As
shown in Table.1, the measurement error is found by comparing
the distance measured by the camera with the actual distance
under water. As the actual distance increases, the measurement
error exhibits a slightly nonlinearly trend. Therefore, the error
correction function can be obtained by fitting the measured
distance against the actual distance.
TABLE 1. ERROR BETWEEN ACTUAL DISTANCE AND MEASURED DISTANCE
Measurement
type First to fourth Fifth to eighth Ninth to
twelfth
Actual distance
(cm)
25.00 45.00 65.00
30.00 50.00 70.00
35.00 55.00 75.00
40.00 60.00 80.00
Measured
distance (cm)
22.18 38.00 55.35
25.30 42.01 59.60
29.38 46.33 63.50
33.83 50.80 68.50
Error (cm)
2.82 7.00 9.65
4.70 7.99 10.40
5.62 8.67 11.50
6.17 9.20 11.50
III. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
A. Static detection
The code in the YOLOv5 detection method was tested and
repackaged, and the binocular ranging algorithm was added into
the code. First, the algorithm identified the object category and
drew a detection box around the object. Next, the binocular
ranging algorithm located the object position on the generated
depth map within the detection box, and determined the final
distance using weighted averages of the effective values on the
outer edge of the object. Considering that the detection process
was executed using the AUV's close-range target recognition
and capture functions, the detection interval was set between
30cm and 100cm.
In the static detection experiment, markings were placed at
200mm intervals on the bottom of a swimming pool and plastic
water bottles and mugs were used as the test objects. The
camera took pictures of the targets at each distance interval,
detecting the position and category of the object and calculating
the distance.
Figure 6. Static detection results of plastic bottles at a distance of 800mm, 600mm, 400mm and 300mm (before correction)
383
Authorized licensed use limited to: Harbin Engineering Univ Library. Downloaded on October 20,2023 at 12:38:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Figure 7. Static detection results of plastic bottles at a distance of 800mm, 600mm, 400mm and 300mm (after correction)
Figure 8. Static detection results of Mugs at a distance of 800mm, 600mm, 400mm and 300mm(before correction)
Figure 9. Static detection results of Mugs at a distance of 800mm, 600mm, 400mm and 300mm (after correction)
As shown in Fig.6-9, the experimental results show that the
system achieved good detection performance for static
underwater targets that were within a range of 300mm-800mm,
with an error within 2%. By comparing the ranging results
before and after the correction, it can be proven that the error
correction scheme for static detection had good performance.
IV. DISCUSSION
This study proposes a new method combining YOLOv5
with a stereo-matching algorithm based on image parallax.
Firstly, a neural network was used to identify and detect the
position of an object in an image. Then, by matching the
detection box with the depth map, the relative distance between
the target and the camera was calculated by the weighted
average method. A large amount of experimental data was
collected and the results show that the method achieved good
performance in both static and dynamic conditions with short
detection time. In summary, this new idea is feasible and can be
effective for real-time target detection of AUV.
V. CONCLUSION
The experimental results show that the new method
proposed in this paper, which combines YOLOv5 with image
disparity based stereo matching algorithm, is feasible and can
be effectively used for real-time object detection in AUV. In the
future, it is necessary to conduct experiments in actual marine
environments and dynamic object detection experiments to
further verify the feasibility of this method.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS