&&&&&&&12.Development of a Coral Monitoring System
for the Use of Underwater Vehicle
Masakazu Arima, Kana Yoshida, Hirofumi Tonai
Department of Marine System Engineering
Osaka Prefecture University
Sakai, Japan
arima@marine.osakafu-u.ac.jp
Abstract— The purpose of this research is to develop a coral
monitoring system for the use of underwater vehicles. Reef coral
is very sensitive about changes of ocean environment, such as
unusual climate changes or increase of crown-of-thorns starfish
resulting from the global warming. Coral can thus be an index of
ocean environment. It is widely known that some kinds of corals
have an inherent characteristic of fluorescence due to ‘coral
fluorescent protein (CFP).’ The authors are developing an oceangoing
solar-powered underwater glider, named ‘Tonai60’. The
operational depth of the Tonai60 glider is 60m, for ocean
environmental monitoring in twilight ocean zone. The Tonai60
glider is equipped with an ocean-environment monitoring data
logger ‘RINKO-Profiler’ of JFE Advantech Co., Ltd. and an
underwater passive acoustic data logger ‘A-tag’ of Marine Micro
Technology Corp. for monitoring marine mammals. Measuring
items of RINKO-Profiler are depth, temperature, conductivity,
salinity, dissolved oxygen, chlorophyll and turbidity. The glider is
also equipped with a coral monitoring system at the forefront of
its fuselage. This system consists of a network camera and 3-axis
digital compass. Coral can be detected from an image binarised
with a certain threshold. This paper deals with a coral
monitoring system using ultraviolet LEDs and image analyses.
Keywords—coral monitoring system; ocean ecosystem;
underwater vehicle; Tonai60
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, there often occur natural disasters due to
abnormal weather the whole world over. Climate changes
resulting from the warming of the globe have a great impact on
ocean ecosystem, too. Japanese Ministry of the Environment
has formulated the ‘Marine Biodiversity Conservation
Strategy’ in March 2011. This Conservation Strategy aims to
conserve the biodiversity which supports the sound structure
and function of marine ecosystems, and to utilise ecological
services of the ocean in a sustainable manner. The
Conservation Strategy made mention as follows [1];
‘Coral reefs are suggested to be vulnerable to the climate
change, and their large-scale bleaching by the increased
seawater temperature has been observed frequently in recent
years around the world. Furthermore, increasing ambient
concentrations of carbon dioxide will lead to more carbon
dioxide dissolved into seawater and subsequent aggravation of
its acidification. Acidification of seawater will then suppress
calcification to produce calcium carbonate for the skeleton of
corals and the shell of plankton. Some species may not be able
to form its skeleton or shell, and balance of the ecosystem may
be lost due to changes in the species composition.
To implement the measures necessary for marine
biodiversity such as conservation, to check the effects of those
measures and to react adaptively, changes in marine
ecosystems must be observed, and monitoring must be
encouraged. Through survey programs such as Monitoring
Sites 1000, data on the natural environment such as data on
biota of shallow water ecosystems (seaweed beds, tidal flats,
coral reefs, etc.) will be improved continuously. At the same
time, data on sea turtles, sea birds, marine mammals and so on
will be collected and organized. Furthermore, if information
that has not been collected continuously turns out to be
important in detecting changes in marine biodiversity, a
method to monitor such information will be examined, and
efforts will be made to accumulate it.’
The purpose of this research is development of a coral
monitoring system, especially for the use of autonomous
underwater vehicles (AUVs). Observations of reef corals are
usually conducted by humans; scuba diving for detailed
investigation of dominant species, manta tow technique and
line intercept transects for a local-area investigation of coral
coverage. Aeroplanes and satellites are sometimes used for a
wide-range and rough investigation of coral distribution. Each
of these methods has its advantages and disadvantages [2, 3].
For instance, there are time restrictions for scuba diving at a
depth of over 30 metres. Observations by humans using ships
and aeroplanes are influenced by weather and sea conditions.
Remote sensing by satellites is obstructed by clouds.
The authors plan to realise a wide-range and long-term
monitoring of reef corals using autonomous underwater glider.
This paper deals with a coral monitoring system which consists
of a high-sensitivity network camera and a 3-axis digital
compass for the use of navigation and a controller on board the
ocean-going solar-powered underwater glider, named Tonai60.
It is widely known that some kinds of corals have an inherent
characteristic of fluorescence due to coral fluorescent protein
(CFP) [4]. Coral can be detected from an image binarised with
a certain threshold, and the network camera will be controlled
automatically so as to maintain its lens to a downward direction,
even though the attitude of the glider was changed.