&&&&&&&6.Vision Based Underwater Environment Analysis: A Novel
Approach to Estimate Size of Coral Reefs
A.Maurya1, R.Govekar1, Pramod Maurya2and Anirban Chaterjee2
1National Institute of Technology, GOA, India
2National Institute of Oceanography, GOA, India
abhishek11.maurya1997@gmail.com, rajatgovekar@gmail.com, maurya@nio.org,
snanirban@nitgoa.ac.in
Abstract—The purpose of our work is to detect and estimate the size of underwater
coral reef from image frames using vision based technique. Deep learning
architecture is proposed to detect the coral reefs. To extract the frames and build
data set, real time underwater video is used. The size of reef is estimated using
distance-based algorithm with detected coral information. A nonlinear function is
formulated and optimized to get accurate reef size as pixels taken by it in image
changes with distance. This algorithm can also be used for real-time analysis of the
underwater environment. It is evident from the analysis results and comparison with
actual data that the proposed method is accurate in estimating the area occupied by
underwater coral reefs.
Index Terms— Coral Reef, Deep Learning, Nonlinear, Distance-based
1. Introduction
Coral reefs are one of the world’s most
biological marine ecosystems. Coral reefs,
ecologically species diversity and bio
productivity in the ocean are important because
they are the counterpart to tropical rain forests.
Since the past decades it is increasingly at risk
of the wide diversity of animal and plant species
contributing to their system and its genetic
heritage. Coral reef allows for the formation of
associated ecosystems, which enable basic
habitats, fish and livelihoods to be created.
Therefore, it is important to monitor the coral
reef ecosystem. The automated analysis
process for underwater visuals would enhance
the investigation of coral reef dynamics and
processes through reduction of the analytic
bottleneck and the full use of large submarine
image data sets by researchers.
Using vision-based technique, analysis of
underwater environment can easily be
performed getting great accuracies. One of the
deep learning architectures, MobileNet SSD
(Neural Network Architecture) is used for
detection of underwater coral reefs from image
frames. Depth wise convolution is used in
978-1-7281-5326-1/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE MobileNet architecture, helps in fast
Authorized licensed use limited to: Harbin Engineering Univ Library. Downloaded on October 20,2023 at 12:31:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
A.Maurya et al .:Vision Based Underwater Environment Analysis: A Novel Approach to Estimate Size of Coral Reefs 175
processing of high quality image taken from
GoPro Hero4 camera. Base MobileNet Layers,
used as feature extractor converts image pixels
to features that describes the image content.
SSD, a single-shot multicategory detector is
faster than previous state-of -the-Art single-shot
detectors (YOLO). SSD layers of the Neural
network responsible for predictions of bounding
boxes.
Image Enhancement of frames becomes
important as quality of images are different with
varying depth and hence increases accuracy of
detection. Using Image frames Pixel per metric
ratio of it with different distance is used to
estimate the size of coral reef, taking nonlinear
parameters into consideration.
2. Detection of Coral Reef
using MobileNet SSD
Figure 1 shows method of detection of
underwater coral reefs.
Fig. 1. Methods of detection of underwater coral reefs
Authorized licensed use limited to: Harbin Engineering Univ Library. Downloaded on October 20,2023 at 12:31:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
176 ©2019 IEEE PROCEEDINGS OF SYMPOL-2019
2.1 Pre-processing of Data
Parameters of image acquisition are
important for coral reef size estimation.
Processing of Image frames is required for
enhancing the accuracy of detection after
training of neural network.
2.1.1 Image Acquisition
Underwater environment was captured at an
approximate height of 3.5 ft. by taking video
using GoPro hero 4 camera.
There are sand patches, fish and various
types of living coral reefs in this environment.
Images were taken using the OpenCV library in
Python to extract the frames from the video.
Extraction was done at 2 frames per second to
avoid overlapping the same images.
2.1.2 Image Enhancement
High frequency components in image are
enhanced by increasing the contrast of all
frames thus increasing detailing. Image frames
are then Histogram Equalized for red, blue and
green component before features are extracted
from them.
2.2 Detection using Processed data
Using convolution neural network
architecture, sand patches and coral reefs are
detected. It has been found that MobileNet is
best suited for underwater imaging [1]. The
MobileNet model is based on depth-separable
convolutions, a form of factorized convolutions
that factor a standard convolution into a
depthwise convolution and a convolution called
a pointwise convolution. The standard
convolution layer is parameterized by the
convolution kernel, where spatial dimension of
the kernel is supposed to be square with number
of input channels and N number of output
channels.
The architecture for MobileNet is defined in
Table 1. ReLU nonlinearity follows all layers
except the final fully connected layer that has no
nonlinearity and feeds into a classification
softmax layer. Down sampling is handled in
both the depth convolutions and the first layer
with strided convolution. A final average
pooling in front of the fully connected layer
reduces the spatial resolution to 1.
(a) (b)
Fig. 2. Different convolution layers. (a)
Standard convolution layers. (b)
Depthwise separable convolution
layers.
3. Flowchart of Coral reef Size
Estimation
Figure 3 shows the detailed flowchart of
size estimation of coral reef. Normalized
coordinates are pixel values of detection boxes
in an image frame.
3.1 Detailed Steps of Size estimation
i. Normalized pixels obtained are
converted to absolute pixels.
ii. Pixels covered by object in length and
width is found using the information of
absolute pixel.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Harbin Engineering Univ Library. Downloaded on October 20,2023 at 12:31:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
A.Maurya et al .:Vision Based Underwater Environment Analysis: A Novel Approach to Estimate Size of Coral Reefs 177
iii. Sigmoidal 5PL function (Equation 1) is
applied on the values of Pixel per metric
with different distance.
iv. The function is optimized and values of
constants are obtained such that curve is
fitted accurately.
v. Accurate Pixel per metric ratio is
obtained for desired Distance.
vi. Size of object is obtained using the
information of pixels covered and pixel
per metric obtained using Equation 1.
Fig. 3. Detailed flowchart of size
estimation of coral reef
4. Coral Reef Size Estimation
In Underwater environment, area covered
by coral reefs are estimated by estimating the
size and area of each detected coral patch
using information of pixels taken by patch and
pixel per metric ratio.
4.1 Using Pixel per Metric Ratio
After coral reef detection, neural network
coordinates were used to create a bounding
box around coral detected. Standardized
coordinates are changed to absolute pixel
values by multiplying coordinates with size of
image given as input to neural network for
training. ‘X’ coordinate is multiplied by ‘400’
and ‘Y’ coordinate is multiplied by ‘300’.
Number of pixels occupied by the coral’s
length and breadth is found using set of
absolute pixel values. Different samples were
taken with different distances, from an object
underwater and the pixel values are obtained.
Using pixel values and object size in cm scale,
pixel per metric ratio (number of pixels in one
cm) is calculated.
4.2 Formulation and Optimization
Using the obtained Pixel per Metric values,
a nonlinear function is formulated and
optimized accordingly as shown in Figure 4.
Fig. 4. Variation of pixel per metric
ratio with distance.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Harbin Engineering Univ Library. Downloaded on October 20,2023 at 12:31:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
178 ©2019 IEEE PROCEEDINGS OF SYMPOL-2019
Formula used for Fitting:
y = 􀭢􀬾(􀭟􀬿􀭢)
(􀬵 􀬾 (􀱮
􀱙) 􀱘)􀱣 (1)
The Five Parameter Logistic Regression or
5PL nonlinear regression model is widely used
for curve-fitting analysis [4]. It is defined by the
classic "S" or sigmoidal form that matches the
curve's bottom and top plateaus, the EC50 and
the slope factor (the slope of Hill). This curve is
symmetrical about its point of inflection. The
5PL formula adds an additional parameter to
expand the model to accommodate curves that
are not symmetrical, quantifying the
asymmetry. The 5PL equation parameters are:
A = Minimum asymptote. In a bioassay
where you have a standard curve, this can be
thought of as the response value at 0 standard
concentration.
B = Hill's slope. The Hill's slope refers to the
steepness of the curve. It could either be
positive or negative.
C = Inflection point. The inflection point is
defined as the point on the curve where the
curvature changes direction or signs.
D = Maximum asymptote. In a bioassay
where you have a standard curve, this can be
thought of as the response value for infinite
standard concentration.
M = Asymmetry factor. When M=1 we have
a symmetrical curve around inflection point and
so we have a four-parameter logistic equation.
Obtained value after optimization:
a=20.7794; b= 32.8038; c= 10.5057; d=
0.023534; m= 0.0276115.Real object size is
obtained using Equation 2.
Object size(cm) = Object size(pixels)
Pixels per metric
(2)
5. Result and Discussions
Dataset for images was created by
extracting the image frames from underwater
videos taken with known height. Results of
training of Neural Network and testing of it
were obtained as follows:
 Total Images in Dataset – 4000.
 Training Set- 70%, Testing Set- 15%
 Validation Method- Revalidation,
 Validation Set - 15%,
 Average Training accuracy of images
is 100%.
 Average Test accuracy of images is
93%
M. Marcos et al. [2] used feedforward
backpropagation neural network to classify
close-up images of coral reef components into
three benthic categories: living coral, dead
coral and sand, reaching a success rate of
86.7% while their two-step classifier, on the
other hand, reached 79.7%. A. Shihavuddin et
al. [3] achieved overall accuracy of 85.5
percent on the dataset of Moorea-labelled
corals (MLC). The network used to train our
dataset outperformed the coral reef detection
techniques implemented in the past.
For training the convolution neural network
Google Collab was used. It uses 1xTesla k80
GPU having 2496 CUDA cores having 12 GB
GDDR5 VRAM. It uses a 1x single core hyper
threaded i.e. (1 core, 2 threads) Xeon
processors @ 2.3 GHz CPU. It has a 12.6 GB
RAM. It took 2 hours to train the network.
Figure 5 shows detection of coral reef
patches from an underwater image frame.
Starting from top first patch is detected with
96% accuracy, with another two patch detected
as 93% and 90% respectively. Fig. 6 shows
the detected coral reef from a different data
set. It had an accuracy of 95% signifying that
Authorized licensed use limited to: Harbin Engineering Univ Library. Downloaded on October 20,2023 at 12:31:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
A.Maurya et al .:Vision Based Underwater Environment Analysis: A Novel Approach to Estimate Size of Coral Reefs 179
our trained model is accurate.
Fig. 5. Coral reef detection
Fig. 6. Elkhorn coral detection
Fig. 7. Coral reef detection
Fig. 8. Table coral detection
Figure 7 shows the detection of Brain corals
underwater image frame and size estimation of
area covered by coral reef is shown in Table 1.
First Patch shows detected reef with an
accuracy of 95%, and second patch is detected
with accuracy of 85%. Its Standard size ranges
upto 1.8 m or 5.9 ft. After applying the
proposed size estimation algorithm, the size is
estimated as 1.72 m, which verifies our result
correctly.
Figure 8 shows the detected Table corals,
species of Acropora genus which has standard
width upto 2.2 m. With the detection of table
coral in Fig. 8 its size is estimated as 2.48 m,
after applying the algorithm which validates our
result.
Table 1 shows the analysis of coral reef
detected in an underwater image frame, in
terms of numerical values to find out the area
covered by detected coral reef patches, in real
life scenario.
On the scale of 1920 pixels lengthwise and
1080 breadthwise, values in Pixels Taken
column gives the number of pixels taken by
the detected coral reef patch. Using algorithm
with other known parameters such as pixel per
metric, size of coral is estimated (length and
width). Area covered under coral reef is
estimated by the product of length and width
of detected coral reef patch. In this table reef
no. 1 and 2 are from Figure 7 and reef no. 3 is
from Figure 8.
Table 2 shows the comparison between the
average estimated length and actual length of
Authorized licensed use limited to: Harbin Engineering Univ Library. Downloaded on October 20,2023 at 12:31:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
180 ©2019 IEEE PROCEEDINGS OF SYMPOL-2019
corals in underwater system. Average
Percentage Error is found to be minimal after
comparison.
Table 1. Estimated Size of Coral Reef
Table 2. Estimated length of coral vs actual
length
Coral types
Average
Estimated
length (m)
Actual
length
(m)
Average
Percentage
Error (%)
Brain coral
(Figure 7) 1.75 1.8 2.77 %
Table coral
(Figure 8) 2.31 2.2 5%
6. Conclusion
Coral reef analysis in 400×300 size image
frame is performed at 2 fps from underwater
environment video for each second image from
the extracted frames. In MobileNet architecture,
detachable convolution is done before giving
features to fully connected layers to reduce the
complexity of extraction of features. Detected
coral reefs provide relevant information about
the pixels occupied longitudinally and
breadthwise in an image used to estimate the
size. Non-linear function, mapping the pixel
values to the metric distance ratio is optimized
to give the desired distance near accurate ratio
value. The observations obtained using this
algorithm provides the reliable values of the
area covered in an image frame by the coral
reefs.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
It is a great pleasure to acknowledge my
deepest thanks and gratitude to Prof. Pramod
Maurya, scientist of National Institute of
Oceanography. I express my sincere heartfelt
gratitude to Dr. Anirban Chatterjee from NIT
Goa and all the members of NIT Goa, who
helped me directly or indirectly during this
course of work.
