&&&&&&&8.Automatic Annotation of Coral Reefs
using Deep Learning
A. Mahmood∗, M. Bennamoun∗, S. An∗, F. Sohel†, F. Boussaid∗, R. Hovey∗, G. Kendrick∗ and R.B. Fisher‡
∗The University of Western Australia, Australia; email: ammar.mahmood@research.uwa.edu.au
†Murdoch University, Australia
‡University of Edinburgh, Scotland
Abstract—Healthy coral reefs play a vital role in maintaining
biodiversity in tropical marine ecosystems. Deep sea exploration
and imaging have provided us with a great opportunity to look
into the vast and complex marine ecosystems. Data acquisition
from the coral reefs has facilitated the scientific investigation
of these intricate ecosystems. Millions of digital images of
the sea floor have been collected with the help of Remotely
Operated Vehicles (ROVs) and Autonomous Underwater Vehicles
(AUVs). Automated technology to monitor the health of the
oceans allows for transformational ecological outcomes by
standardizing methods for detecting and identifying species.
Manual annotation is a tediously repetitive and a time consuming
task for marine experts. It takes 10-30 minutes for a marine
expert to meticulously annotate a single image. This paper aims
to automate the analysis of large available AUV imagery by
developing advanced deep learning tools for rapid and large-scale
automatic annotation of marine coral species. Such an automated
technology would greatly benefit marine ecological studies in
terms of cost, speed, accuracy and thus in better quantifying the
level of environmental change marine ecosystems can tolerate.
We propose a deep learning based classification method for coral
reefs. We also report the application of the proposed technique
towards the automatic annotation of unlabelled mosaics of
the coral reef in the Abrolhos Islands, Western Australia.
Our proposed method automatically quantifies the coral
coverage in this region and detects a decreasing trend in coral
population which is in line with conclusions by marine ecologists.
Index Terms—corals, deep learning, marine images, classification,
marine ecosystems.
I. INTRODUCTION
The automatic annotation of marine images allows for transformational
ecological outcomes by standardizing methods
to detect and identify species. It frees up experts from the
tediously repetitive task of manual annotation. It also enables
rapid and accurate processing of massive datasets. An ever
expanding human activity coupled with climate change have
severely damaged marine ecosystems, which play a key role
in our planet’s ability to sustain life. Yet accurate automated
technology to monitor the health of our oceans exist only on a
limited scale. Marine scientists still have to manually annotate
a massive amount of raw underwater imagery. This research
aims to address this bottleneck by developing advanced deep
learning and computer vision based models for automatic
annotation of imagery from coral reefs.
Rapidly increasing carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere
due to ever expanding human activities are posing severe
threats to marine ecosystems in general [1] and coral reefs
in particular [2], [3] and [4]. Increased water temperatures are
thought to be responsible for bleaching and death of corals [2].
Some coral species are in danger of extinction due to these
adverse effects of pollution, industrial fishing and exploitation
of marine resources. This has resulted in a dramatic decline
in our planet’s marine biodiversity [5]. Today’s underwater
video cameras mounted on AUVs are an excellent alternative
to trawl nets, grabs and towed video surveys for remote
monitoring of marine ecosystems as they sample along a preprogrammed
flight path, producing geo-referenced imagery of
the sea-floor [6]. However, analysing raw imagery to extract
useful information is not only labour intensive, but it also
requires an expert to manually process each image. Typically
less than 2% of the acquired imagery ends up being manually
annotated by a marine expert, resulting in a significant loss of
information [7]. An accurate automatic annotation of marine
imagery would enable automatic counting, sizing and movement
tracking of specific marine organisms. Computer vision
and machine learning based techniques [8] have the potential
to automate the annotation of marine images and also reduce
the time consumed in manual processing. The accuracy of
these techniques depends on the availability of high quality
expertly annotated training and testing data.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [9], also known as
deep networks, are an important class of machine learning
algorithms applicable, among others, to numerous computer
vision problems. Deep CNNs, in particular, are composed of
multiple layers of processing involving linear as well as nonlinear
operators. To solve a particular task, the parameters of
networks are learned in an end-to-end manner. Image representations
extracted from deep CNNs trained on a large dataset
such as ImageNet [10] have shown to produce a promising
performance for diverse classification and recognition tasks
[11], [12], [13], [14] and [15]. Spatial pyramid pooling (SPP)
[16] and Multi-scale Orderless Pooling (MOP) [17] schemes
have made CNNs independent of the input image size and
robust for diverse classification and recognition applications.
In this paper, we propose a computer vision and deep
learning based framework for the automatic annotation of
unlabelled coral images. This framework is based on a novel
coral classification algorithm, which employs the powerful
image representations of CNNs. Since we do not have ground
truth labels for millions of coral reef images, a human expert
978-1-5090-1537-5/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Harbin Engineering Univ Library. Downloaded on October 20,2023 at 12:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Fig. 1: Block diagram of our proposed framework.
is included in the loop to corroborate the accuracy of the proposed
classification method. With the trained coral classifiers,
we analyse the coral reefs of the Abrolhos Islands which form
one of Western Australia’s unique marine areas. We analyse
unlabelled coral mosaics of three sites of this coral reef from
two years.
The main contributions of this paper include: (1) a method
to learn features using a CNN for coral reef classification; (2)
automatic annotation of unlabelled coral images and mosaics
from the Abrolhos Islands in Western Australia; (3) coral
population analysis for these mosaics.
II. RELATED WORK
In 2010, Collaborative and Automated Tools for the Analysis
of Marine Imagery and Video (CATAMI)[18] was initiated
in Australia. It introduced a new classification system to ensure
that consistent names are given to the marine species seen in
underwater images. However, this system does not actually
automate the data analysis. It just streamlines the project by
facilitating manual data entry and provides a standard protocol
for assigning ground truth labels. Previous research ([7], [19],
[20], [21] and [22]) have highlighted the potential of using
computer vision based techniques for the automatic annotation
of benthic data. However, this is an uphill task given the factors
such as changing water turbidity, ambiguous class boundaries
and underwater color degradation.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
The proposed method is outlined in Fig. 1. The training
image set consists of images from multiple locations in
Western Australia, a subset of Benthoz15 dataset [23]. These
images are used to train a deep network which then classifies
unlabelled images and mosaics. Marine experts are included
in this pipeline to give feedback on the classification accuracy.
The best performing classifier is then used to generate coral
maps from the mosaics of the Abrolhos Islands. Next, we
explain the key components of the proposed method in the
following subsections.
A. Classification Process
Image representations extracted from deep neural networks,
trained on large datasets such as ImageNet [9] and fine tuned
on domain specific datasets, have shown state-of-art performance
in numerous image classification problems [14]. The
activation vectors of the first fully connected layer of a pretrained
VGGnet [24] are employed as feature representations
in our work. The weights of this deep network are fine tuned
using the Benthoz15 dataset [23] which consists of expertannotated
and geo-referenced marine images from Australian
seas.
It is a common practice in marine imagery to annotate the
images with pixel labels. Each training image has 50 pixels
marked with corresponding ground truth labels. State-of-art
deep learning architectures take an input image of fixed size
and hence image or patch ground truth labels are required. To
overcome this bottleneck, square patches were extracted with
the labelled pixel at their centre. There is no restriction on the
size of these patches. Instead of using the whole image for
training, we extracted patches at multiple scales centred around
the given labelled pixels. We achieved higher classification
accuracy when multi-scale patches were used instead of just
one fixed size. This technique is termed as spatial pyramid
pooling (SPP) [16]. This patch extraction method makes the
resulting features scale invariant. A 2-layered neural network
was then used to classify corals from non-corals. More details
on the classification process are given in our previous work
[25].
B. Unlabelled Mosaics and Coral Maps
The unlabelled images and mosaics from the Abrolhos
Islands were annotated with the best performing trained coral
classifier. We analysed mosaics of three different sites of the
Abrolhos Islands spanning an area of 625 sq. meters each for
years 2010 and 2013. Fig. 2 shows the path followed by the
Sirius AUV [23] to capture the coral reef and some sample
images. A marine expert was added in the loop to validate the
labels assigned by this classifier. After validation, the coral
mosaics of each site were analysed to investigate the changes
in the coral population. We focused on generating coral maps
for these sites to investigate the health of coral population for
each site over a period of three years. These coral maps were
automatically generated by our classifier and provide useful
insight for quantifying the population changes of the reef.
Marine experts were included in the pipeline to corroborate
and comment on the authenticity of these maps.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
A. Benthoz15 Dataset
This Australian benthic data set (Benthoz15) [23] consists
of an expert-annotated set of georeferenced benthic images and
associated sensor data, captured by an autonomous underwater
vehicle (AUV) around Australia. The whole dataset contains
407,968 expert labelled points, on 9,874 distinct images collected
at different depths from nine sites around Australia
over the past few years. There are almost 40 distinct class
Authorized licensed use limited to: Harbin Engineering Univ Library. Downloaded on October 20,2023 at 12:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Fig. 2: The path traversed by the Sirius AUV over the 3 years near the Abrolhos Islands in WA and sample images. Latitude=28
degrees 48 minutes South. Longitude = 113 degrees and 57 minutes East.
Site Survey Year # of Labels # of Images
Abrolhos Islands 2011, 2012, 2013 119,273 1,377
Rottnest Island 2011 63,600 1,272
Jurien Bay 2011 55,050 1,101
TABLE I: WA subset of Benthoz15 in numbers.
labels in this dataset which make it quite challenging. Table. I
details some statistics of the Western Australia (WA) subset of
this dataset. We have used a subset of this dataset containing
images from Western Australia (WA) to train our classifier.
This subset consists of 4,750 images with 237,500 expertannotated
points collected over a span of 3 years (2011 to
2013).
B. Pre-processing
We applied color channel stretch on each image in the
dataset. We calculated the 1% and 99% intensity percentiles
for each color channel. The lower intensity was subtracted
from all the intensities in each respective channel and the
negative values were set to zero. These intensities were then
divided by the upper percentile. The resulting intensities
achieved a better performance compared to the original ones.
C. Classification Experiments and Results
Selecting patch sizes that give the best classification accuracy
is an important step. We trained our classifier using
multiple patches at different scales and achieved the best
performance when these three patch sizes were used: 28×28,
224×224, and 448×448. These correspond to small, medium
and large scales. Feature extraction at different sizes insures an
efficient encoding of coral species independently of their size.
28x28
224x
224
448x
448
VGGnet
Max-pooling
Spatial
Pyramid
2 Layer MLP
Coral
Non-
Coral
Fig. 3: Block diagram of the proposed classification method.
The image representations extracted at these three scales were
then max-pooled to retain the most prominent information
which is present in the neighbourhood of a labelled pixel.
These multi-scale deep features were used to train a Multi
Layer Perceptron (MLP) network for classification. This network
consists of two fully connected hidden layers of neurons
followed by an output layer with 2 nodes: corals and noncorals.
The number of neurons in the hidden layers were
optimized for maximum performance. Fig. 3 shows the block
diagram of our proposed classification method.
We conducted three experiments to evaluate our classifier:
(i) the classifier was trained on two-thirds of the images from
the year 2011 and tested on the remaining images from the
same year, (ii) the images from year 2011 were used for
training and the images from 2012 and 2013 constitute the
test set, (iii) the training set consisted of two-thirds of the
images from the years 2011, 2012 and 2013, whereas the test
set consists of all the remaining images from the same years.
Table. II shows the details and reports the preliminary results
Authorized licensed use limited to: Harbin Engineering Univ Library. Downloaded on October 20,2023 at 12:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Experiment # of Training Samples # of Test Samples Accuracy
Exp 1: Train and test
on 2011 108,000 53,000 97.00%
Exp 2: Train on 2011 and
test on 2012 and 2013 108,000 130,000 92.45%
Exp 3: Train and test on
2011,2012 and 2013 157,173 80,750 95.33%
TABLE II: Overall classification accuracies for different
experiments
Site Coral Coverage in 2010 Coral Coverage in 2013
1 95% 79%
2 82% 53%
3 96% 74%
TABLE III: Coral coverage of three sites of the Abrolhos
Islands for years 2010 and 2013.
of coral classification on Benthoz15 dataset. We achieved a
classification accuracy greater than 90% in all of our experiments.
The best performance is achieved when the training and
testing sets contain images from the same year. The performance
dropped when the experiments were done across
multiple years. This illustrates the difficulty encountered when
the training and test set have images from different years.
The main reason being the changes occurring in the coral
reefs with time. The major causes of misclassification were:
the ambiguous boundaries between corals and non-corals,
dead corals (non-coral species start covering corals) and the
abundance of non-coral labels in the dataset.
D. Coral Population Analysis
For the coral population analysis of the Abrolhos Islands,
we automatically annotated the unlabelled mosaics using our
best classifier. Outputs were validated by a marine expert
as ground-truth labels were not available. Coral cover maps
were then generated using the best performance classifier
for years 2010 and 2013, and percentage coral cover was
calculated for each site and year. Results of this analysis
reveal a decline in coral cover at all three from 2010 to
2013. This loss of corals was expected as an acute warming
event occurred in 2011 which resulted in significant coral
bleaching. Importantly, the magnitude of decline reported here
is comparable to those previously reported across a similar
time period for the Abrolhos Islands from imagery annotated
by marine experts, with an average decline in coral cover
from 73% to 59% across multiple sites [3]. The ability to
efficiently report coral response to particular impacts (such as
intense warming events) or gradual environmental change, is
crucial for implementing appropriate management strategies
[4]. Our initial results indicate that the combination of AUVs
and automated image analysis have the capacity to improve our
efficiency of transferring information to managers and policy
makers.
V. CONCLUSION
In this work, we applied pre-trained CNN image representations
extracted from VGGnet to a coral reef classification
problem. We investigated the effectiveness of our trained classifier
on unlabelled coral mosaics of the Abrolhos Islands. We
analysed the coral reef of the Abrolhos Islands to investigate
the trends in coral population. We generated coral maps for
this region and quantified the coral population automatically.
Our framework detected the decreasing trend in the coral
population of this region as well. The proposed framework is
an important step towards investigating the long-term effects
of environmental change on the effective sustenance of marine
ecosystems automatically.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was partially supported by Australian Research
Council Grants (DP150104251 and DE120102960) and
the Integrated Marine Observing System (IMOS) through the
Department of Innovation, Industry, Science and Research (DIISR),
National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Scheme.
The authors also acknowledge NVIDIA for providing a Titan-
X GPU for the experiments involved in this research.
