&&&&&&&9.Surveillance of Coral Reef Development Using an
Autonomous Underwater Vehicle
Mohammad Fahmi Amri Bin Mohd Murad
Centre for Artificial Intelligence & Robotics,
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
fahmiamri92@gmail.com
Mohamed Idzham Bin Samah
Centre for Artificial Intelligence & Robotics,
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
mohamedidzham@gmail.com
Zool H Ismail
Centre for Artificial Intelligence & Robotics,
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
zool@utm.my
Karl Sammut
Centre for Maritime Engineering
Flinders University
Adelaide, Australia
karl.sammut@flinders.edu.au
Abstract—With the arrival of new robotic technologies
such as an Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (AUV), a
number of tasks that cannot be done by human now can be
accomplished and bring human to reach the dangerous
and unreachable areas. An AUV can be related to the most
invention which can reduce human’s work using
specialized equipment and devices that control and
perform the particular tasks. Therefore, it is able to fulfil
the predetermined task without any human control and to
react against unexpected situation by its artificial
intelligence. This paper examines the effectiveness of using
AUV as surveillance system for coral reef ecology. We
propose a new AUV that ease researcher or activist to
survey the condition of coral reef ecology environment.
Keywords—AUV; Coral Reef; morphological; ROS;
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, technology of robotics expands in all area of
engineering and environment expertise which focuses on an
Autonomous Underwater (AUV). Recently, underwater
vehicle has been used in limited number of task. With further
research and development, underwater vehicle can reduce the
limitation and increase the capability to do more tasks. There
are lots of AUVs with different function and tasks operated
worldwide. Today, most of Autonomous Underwater Vehicles
(AUV) can be seen in military field, oiled and gas industry
and some of the expedition to explore under the deep sea.
However, this AUV's project focuses on an inspection of the
coral reef ecology which is on environment expertise. Coral
reefs are an important natural source which can be found in a
tropical water throughout the world [1]. The condition of coral
reef can be maintained from time to time by developing an
AUV.
Currently, the existing AUV used to explore a coral reef is
still an expensive technology to be developed by researcher
throughout the world. It can be said that it is still an expensive
technology to be developed by researcher throughout the
world. From this reason, this project proposes a low cost AUV
which allows the researchers and environmental activist to use
for their coral reef surveillance and exploration.
II. THE GOAL OF THE AUV PROJECT
This paper will describe the suitable design and affordable
autonomous underwater vehicle for coral reef surveillance and
overcome human limitation. In the end of this project, an
AUV can be operated as surveillance system for researchers or
environment activists.
III. KEY DESIGN PROPOSAL
To build an AUV, budget and technology need to be
planed carefully. In this paper we target to ease researcher and
activist by produce affordable autonomous underwater vehicle
and yet have the same function as existing autonomous
underwater vehicle that operate on coral reef sector in the
world.
A. Mechanical Design
To build an Autonomous Underwater Vehicle that can
tackle harsh environment and reach beyond human limit a
toughest and high manueverability AUV are needed [2]. Our
imaginary AUV will have size about 125cm long, 42cm width
and 18cm height. Those dimension is sizeable as our AUV
need to carry sensing and navigation instruments. This AUV
uses a ‘torpedo’ type design which can moves up to 5 degree
of freedom. As shown in our schematic design, our AUV
design based on torpedo shape to make it easy to maneuver on
challenging environment which human cannot arrive on that
area. 5 small-yet-powerful thrusters from BlueRobotic allow
the AUV moves in all area of the reef.